# ⚓ Anchor Migrations
Anchor Migrations are SQL DDL changes, safety-linted (non-blocking), idempotent, intended to augment and speed up DDL changes limited by ORM migrations.

Anchor Migrations generate Active Record ORM migrations. They're both specific files, and a "workflow."

## Commands
```sh
anchor init         # initialize directories
anchor generate     # generate empty versioned .sql file, to be filled in
anchor lint         # safety-lint .sql files using Squawk
anchor backfill     # Create Active Record migration from SQL
anchor migrate      # Apply the Anchor Migration DDL
```

## Installation
Add `anchor_migrations` to your `development` and `test` Gemfile groups:
```rb
group :development, :test do
  gem 'anchor_migrations'
end
```
Then run `bundle install`.

## Preconditions
Anchor Migrations have a restricted workflow for now (may get more flexible) and expect a few things:
- Postgres only, 13+ (minimum for `DROP INDEX CONCURRENTLY`)
- `DATABASE_URL` environment variable set to target database (e.g. production), and is reachable
- `psql` client accessible in PATH
- [Squawk](https://squawkhq.com) executable ([Quick Start documentation](https://squawkhq.com/docs/)) accessible in PATH

## Safety linting and lock_timeout
Squawk is used on SQL migration files to check for unsafe operations. For example, creating or dropping an index without the `CONCURRENTLY` keyword is unsafe, and is detected by Squawk.

Anchor Migrations require safety-linted SQL, although right now it's up to the developer to run `anchor lint` in their workflow and make it clear they did in their PR.

Anchor Migration SQL is what's applied by running `anchor migrate`, and this requires a psql client. By default a 2 second `lock_timeout`[^docs] is set.

## What problems do Anchor migrations solve?
Anchor Migrations are a process for organizations not using Trunk Based Development[^tbd] or that have infrequent releases. Instead of being limited to Active Record Migrations,
Anchor Migrations are used to perform DDL without code dependencies, more frequently, then Rails Migrations are used to keep the schema state in sync.

## Example Anchor Migration SQL
Anchor Migrations are stored in `db/anchor_migrations` as `.sql` files. For example:
```sql
-- db/anchor_migrations/20250623173850_create_index_tbl_col.sql
CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY IF NOT EXISTS
idx_trips_created_at ON trips (created_at);
```

Squawk runs on the SQL file above to perform "safety linting," looking for unsafe patterns.

Run it using the `lint` command:
```sh
➜ bundle exec anchor lint

Found 0 issues in 1 file 🎉
```

If Squawk finds issues, apply the fixes and run it again until there are none.

## Example Active Record ORM Migration
This Rails migration was generated from the Anchor Migration SQL above.

Strong Migrations is used, so the `safety_assured` block it expects is added to the Rails migration. This is a configurable option.
```rb
#
# ################################################
# DO NOT EDIT, generated by Anchor Migrations
# Version: 20250623173850
# Source File: db/anchor_migrations/20250623173850_create_index_trips_created_at.sql
# Target File: db/migrate/20250623173850_create_index_trips_created_at.rb
# ################################################
#
class CreateIndexTripsCreatedAt < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  disable_ddl_transaction!

  def change
    safety_assured do
      execute <<-SQL
        CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY IF NOT EXISTS idx_trips_created_at ON trips (created_at);
      SQL
    end
  end
end
```

## Configuration
Anchor Migrations supports generating Strong Migrations-compatible Active Record migrations:
```rb
# config/initializers/anchor_migrations.rb
AnchorMigrations.configure do |config|
  config.use_strong_migrations = true
end
```

## Example PR Workflow
For a PR, add:
1. Generate the Anchor Migration SQL file using `anchor generate`. It's important to customize the name since it will be used in the Rails Migration class name and file name! Fill in the SQL DDL. Make sure it's idempotent.
1. Lint the SQL file using `anchor lint`
1. Backfill the Active Record Migration by running `anchor backfill`. You will need to re-format the Ruby code (`rubocop -a`) as it may be correct, but poorly formatted.
1. Apply the Rails migration like normal: `rails db:migrate`. Include the migration and the changes to `db/structure.sql` or `db/schema.rb` in your PR.
1. You're ready for review. Get an "approval" describing your plan to apply the Anchor Migration. The approval can be a comment in the PR from a team member.
1. With an approval, run `anchor migrate`. Capture the output for the PR. Verify the changes were applied. Once verified, move the SQL migration into `db/anchor_migrations/applied` and update your PR.
1. With that, you're all done. Get a PR approval and merge it in.

The Rails migration "backfills" the DDL for any database where it hasn't already applied. That will be local, CI, etc. but in production it won't apply since it already exists.

## Good uses of Anchor Migrations
### Query support, data integrity, data quality
Indexes and constraints that support query performance or data integrity, don't have code dependencies, can now be added, removed and replaced at a faster cadence, while keeping everything consistent.

Indexes and constraints improve performance and data quality, and arguably shouldn’t be "blocked" by a slow release process that constrains DDL changes.

### Long running DDL changes
On large tables, creating indexes concurrently can take a long time. It's nice to perform that during a low activity period, requiring control over the exact timing, possibly retries, monitoring.

This isn't ideal for ORM migrations and deploys. However, Anchor Migrations are a good fit for this.

## Anchor Migrations Properties
### Idempotent
Anchor Migrations in SQL must be written using idempotent tactics like `IF NOT EXISTS` or by checking that a constraint exists already or doesn't.

This allows the SQL to be the "source" for an Active Record migration, making it idempotent.

### Restricted DDL: What DDL is supported for Anchor Migrations?
Only non-blocking, idempotent DDL is supported. This list is restricted heavily now although additional DDL types may be added in the future:
1. `CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY IF NOT EXISTS`
1. `DROP INDEX CONCURRENTLY IF EXISTS` (Postgres 13+)
1. `ALTER TABLE ADD CONSTRAINT` when it's part of an anonymous block that checks for the existence of the constraint.

### Requires psql
For now, Anchor Migrations assumes you're using psql to apply migrations, and that psql can connect to your target database.

### What's out of scope for Anchor Migrations?
Anchor Migrations are non-blocking and idempotent.

For destructive operations like table drops, column drops, or migrations with code dependencies, Anchor Migrations should not be used.

Remove application code references first, before making schema changes.

Use Strong Migrations or similar to help guide that process, and use regular Rails migrations.

Some of those destructive operations are:
1. `DROP TABLE`
1. Adding a non-nullable column, or a column with a default value
1. Dropping constraints
1. Adding initially valid constraints
1. Add or dropping indexes without the CONCURRENTLY keyword

[^docs]: <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/runtime-config-client.html>
[^tbd]: <https://trunkbaseddevelopment.com>

## Testing Integration in Rails
Add to the project's Gemfile, then run `bundle`.

Once installed, test that it works by running:
```sh
bundle exec anchor help
```

## Building, Testing, Publishing
```sh
gem build anchor_migrations.gemspec
gem install ./anchor_migrations-0.1.0.gem
bundle exec rake test
gem push anchor_migrations-0.1.0.gem
```
